PROMOTHEUS AND GRAFANA : these are used to monitor the servers

PROMOTHEUS : it is used to show the metrics.

GRAFANA : it is used to visualize the promotheus


PROMOTHEUS :
1) promotheus is an opensource monitoring system that is especially well suited for cloud native environments like Kubernetes.
2) it can monitor the performance of your applications and services.
3) it can send the alerts if there any issues.
4) it has a powerful query language that allows you to analyze the data.
5) it pulls the real time metrics , compresses and stores it time-series in database.
6) promotheus is a stand alone system, but it can also be used in conjunction with other tools like Alert manager to send alerts based on data it collects.
7) it can be integration with tools like PagerDuty to send alerts to the appropriate on-call personal.
8) it collects and also have the rich set of integration with other tools and systems.
9) for example you can use promotheus to monitor the health of the Kubernetes clusters , and use its integration with Grafana to visualize the data it collects.


PROMOTHEUS : it is a monitoring system that consist of following components:
1) main server that scrapes and stores time series data.
2) A query language called PromQl is used to retrieve and analyze the data.
3) a set of exporters that are used to collect metrics from various systems and applications.
4) A set of alternating rules that can trigger notifications based on the data.
5) An alert manager that handles the routing and suppression of alerts.


9090 : Prometheus 

9100 : Node Exporter 

3000: Grafana


install the Prometheus , Grafana , Node Exporter.


public_ip_adress:9090   -> Prometheus interface will open 


up : it will show the current running 
process_virtual_memory_bytes : it will give the how many bytes took by promo , nodeexpo 
process_cpu_seconds_total   : it will give the cpu consumption.

if you want to check the server is running or not 

status --> targets --> up/down



HOW TO INTEGRATE THE GRAFANA WITH PROMETEUS  :

Grafana --> add data source --> Prometheus --> Prometheus server url --> save and test --> explore data 

click on three lines left side --> dashboards --> new --> import dashboard --> 1860(to see the cpu and memory information) --> load --> import

if you want to increase the load :

amazon-linux-extras install epel -y

stress --cpu 1 --io 1 --vm-bytes 128MB --timeout 30s 

for next 30 sec it will increase the stress on server. 





















